here's a question for you how many
different scents do you think you can
smell and maybe even identify with
accuracy one hundred three hundred a
thousand one study estimates that humans
can detect up to 1 trillion different
odors a trillion it's hard to imagine
but your nose has a molecular machinery
to make it happen
olfactory receptors tiny scent detectors
are packed into your nose each one
patiently waiting to be activated by the
odor or ligand that it's been assigned
to detect it turns out we humans like
all vertebrates have lots of olfactory
receptors in fact more of our DNA is
devoted to change four different all
factory receptors than for any other
type of protein why is that could
olfactory receptors be doing something
else in addition to allowing us to smell
in 1991 Linda Bock and Richard Axel
uncovered the molecular identity of a
factory receptors work which ultimately
led to a Nobel Prize at the time we all
assumed that these receptors were only
found in the nose however about a year
or so later a report emerged of an
olfactory receptor expressed in a tissue
other than the nose and then another
such report emerged and another we now
know that these receptors are found all
over the body including and some pretty
unexpected places and muscle and kidneys
lungs and blood vessels but
what are they doing there well we know a
little factory receptors act as
sensitive chemical sensors in the nose
that's how they mediate our sense of
smell it turns out they also act as
sensitive chemical sensors in many other
parts of the body now I'm not saying
that your liver can detect the aroma of
your morning coffee as you walk into the
kitchen rather after you drink your
morning coffee your liver might use an
olfactory receptor to chemically detect
the change in concentration of a
chemical floating through your
bloodstream many cell types and tissues
in the body use chemical sensors or
chemo sensors to keep track of the
concentration of hormones metabolites
and other molecules and some of these
chemo sensors are olfactory receptors if
you are a pancreas or a kidney and you
need a specialized chemical sensor that
will allow you to keep track of a
specific molecule why reinvent the wheel
one of the first examples of an
olfactory receptor found outside the
nose showed the human sperm Express and
olfactory receptor and that sperm with
this receptor will seek out the chemical
that the receptor response to the
receptors ligand that is the sperm will
slim to horrid the ligand this has
intriguing implications are sperm Aidid
and finding the egg by sniffing out the
area with the highest ligand
concentration I like this example
because it clearly demonstrates that an
olfactory receptors primary job is to be
a chemical sensor but depending on the
context it can influence how you
perceive a smell or in which directions
perm will slim and as it turns out a
huge variety of other processes while
factory receptors have been implicated
in muscle cell migration and helping the
longest sense
Anto inhaled chemicals tendon wound
healing
similarly taste receptors once thought
to be found only in the tongue are now
known to be expressed in cells and
tissues throughout the body even more
surprisingly a recent study found that
the light receptors in our eyes also
play a role in our blood vessels in my
lab we work on trying to understand the
rules of olfactory receptors and taste
receptors in the context of the kidney
the kidney is a central control center
for homeostasis and to us it makes sense
that a homeostatic control center would
be a logical place to employ chemical
sensors we've identified a number of
different olfactory and taste receptors
in the kidney one of which a factory
receptor 78 is known to be expressed in
cells and tissues that are important in
the regulation of blood pressure when
this receptor is deleted in mice their
blood pressure is low surprisingly this
receptor was found to respond to
chemicals called short chain fatty acids
that are produced by the bacteria that
reside in your gut your gut microbiota
after being produced by your gut
microbiota these chemicals are absorbed
into your bloodstream where they can
then interact with receptors like
olfactory receptor 78 meaning that the
changes in metabolism of your gut
microbiota may influence your blood
pressure although we've identified a
number of different olfactory and taste
receptors in the kidney we've only just
begun to seize out their different
functions and if you grow which
chemicals each of them responds to
similar investigations lie ahead for
many other organs and tissues only a
small minority of receptors has been
studied to date
this is exciting stuff it's
revolutionizing our understanding of the
scope of influence for one of the five
senses and it has the potential to
change our understanding of some aspects
of human physiology it's still early but
I think we've picked up on the sense of
something we're following thank you
[Applause]